The Project Gutenberg eBook of Behind the Scenes in a Hotel, by The
Consumers' League of New York

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States, you
will have to check the laws of the country where you are located before
using this eBook.

Title: Behind the Scenes in a Hotel

Author: The Consumers' League of New York

Release Date: May 25, 2021 [eBook #65443]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

Produced by: ellinora, Barry Abrahamsen, and the Online Distributed
             Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This file was
             produced from images generously made available by The Internet
             Archive/American Libraries.)

*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK BEHIND THE SCENES IN A HOTEL ***




                           BEHIND THE SCENES

                                  IN A

                                 HOTEL






                        PUBLISHED—FEBRUARY, 1922

                                   BY

                   The Consumers’ League of New York
                           289 FOURTH AVENUE
                             NEW YORK CITY


------------------------------------------------------------------------




                      BEHIND THE SCENES IN A HOTEL

[Sidenote: Growth of the hotel industry]

The modern hotel industry, claimed by the 35th Convention of the New
York Hotel Association to be the fifth largest industry in the United
States, is of comparatively recent growth. It is true that from the
earliest times there have been inns and small hostels for the
accommodation of the wayfarer. But this accommodation was the simple
provision of board and lodging. The host and his family ran the house
much as the modern boarding and rooming house is run. Until the late
nineteenth century these houses, small and few in number, were usually
at stage-coach changes along the road. With the great increase in
travel, stimulated by the growth of steam railroads, hotels sprang up in
great numbers and tended to concentrate in large centers of population.
The invention of the elevator and the use of fireproof materials have
made possible the construction of gigantic modern edifices. In the last
few decades, under these conditions, more and more capital has been
attracted to the industry until today there are 40,000 hotels, large and
small, in the United States.

The individual hotel has developed into a complex institution, often of
colossal size, supplying board and lodging on a most luxurious scale. In
all parts of New York State, particularly in the smaller cities and
towns, the small hotel with the inn tradition, with a simple table
d’hôte service at one rate, still exists. But the tendency in New York
City and in first and second class cities of the State has been toward a
rapid expansion in the size of the individual establishment with an
elaboration of service, and a specialization of hotel types. In the
larger cities of the State, there are hotels with 450 or more rooms; in
New York City there are many hotels with from 1000 to 2000 rooms. The
largest hotel in New York, “the largest hotel in the world,” by its own
advertisement, contains 2200 rooms and 2200 baths. In answer to the
special needs of special groups, different types of hotels have sprung
up—the commercial-transient hotel which supplies complete, efficient but
unelaborate service, the apartment house and family hotel with
additional comforts and luxuries for residents of a longer period, the
ultra-fashionable hotel, and the hotel that specializes in banquets,
conventions and other social functions. No distinct classification
holds, for there is usually an overlapping of types.

As the individual hotel has grown, hotel corporations and syndicates
have developed. In New York City the largest, most complete hotels,
almost without exception, are operated by hotel corporations. Two
companies are each managing five of the largest hotels. Another company
manages five hotels, two of which are in first class cities of New York
State and three in other states. One company manages a group of fifteen
smaller family hotels in New York City. Four hotels in four different
up-state cities are managed by still another company. These corporation
managers have united to form the New York State Hotel Men’s Association
and the Hotel Association of New York City for discussion of standards
of operation. This exchange of opinion has resulted in the turning of
hotel managers’ thoughts to standards and policies in regard to labor,
though as yet little of a concrete nature has been accomplished.

                  *       *       *       *       *

[Sidenote: The labor force in the modern hotel]

The labor force required to furnish service in the modern hotel has
necessarily increased enormously since the day when the host of the
old-time hostel and his family personally cared for the needs of their
guests. The following extract from a hotel manager’s pamphlet on the
running of big hotels gives some idea of the problems of labor
management: “The operation of a single metropolitan hotel is too complex
an undertaking to be likened to a gigantic piece of housekeeping. When
it comes to running a group of six of the largest hotels in the world
... the performance becomes of colossal size. The idea of employing 510
men just to cook food and another 925 just to wait on table, finding
need at the same time to call in an average of 3000 waiters a month to
help out on banquets, requiring 380 chambermaids to make beds and so on,
must strike one pretty much as indicative of doing business on a
wholesale scale.”

Hotel managers, however, have been too prone to treat their business as
housekeeping on a big scale. The transition from the small home industry
with a few paying guests has been too rapid for adjustment to large
scale method and standards. The attention of the hotel management, so
far, has been directed toward standards of service to the public. It has
only begun to think of standardization of conditions of employment for
workers. It is perhaps the most backward and unregulated of industries
from the point of view of wages, hours and living conditions, and
comparable only with domestic service. It is one of the few industries
which continues to house its employees as a part of the wage payment. It
is one of the few industries in which tipping or the giving of
gratuities to workers by the public persists.

There are inherent in the business certain definite obstacles to
standardization of labor conditions. The most serious of these is that
it is an almost continuous industry where work is carried on for
eighteen of the twenty-four hours with peaks of greater volume
throughout the day. The hotel managers, however, have not as yet put
their best effort into solving this problem and to working out
standardized conditions of employment.

                  *       *       *       *       *

[Sidenote: The reason for the investigation]

Because for many years it has been aware of the long hours and living-in
conditions in hotels, the Consumers’ League of New York undertook a
study of the hotel industry in the summer and fall of 1921 to discover
the hours, wages, working and living conditions for women workers in the
hotels of New York State.

                  *       *       *       *       *

[Sidenote: The method used in the investigation]

The material used in the report was obtained by the investigators
through their personal experience in working in typical women’s jobs in
the hotel industry and by applying for work in a number of occupations
in hotels and hotel employment offices. The material is necessarily
incomplete and uneven though supplemented wherever possible by
interviews with workers in the industry, officials and members of labor
unions, employment agencies, etc. The report on wages, hours, and
living-in conditions is a statement of the facts and conditions found in
the hotels covered.

                  *       *       *       *       *

[Sidenote: The scope of the investigation]

For the purpose of this investigation a hotel was defined, according to
the American Travel and Hotel Directory, as “any building or structure
of the better class (whose minimum sized bedrooms are at least 50¢ a
night) used or maintained in whole or part for the entertainment of the
traveling public or persons of temporary residence; with sleeping rooms
furnished for hire with or without meals and (in order not to be
confused with lodging or rooming house) maintaining an office or lobby
register.”

The scope of the investigation was necessarily limited because of the
general condition of unemployment in other industries which turned many
women to hotel work. The selection of hotels for the study, therefore,
depended in a large measure upon the chance availability of jobs for the
investigators. An attempt was made, however, to obtain work or apply for
work in hotels as representative of the industry as possible. Hotels
ranging in size from 25 to 2200 rooms were selected. The commercial
hotel, the family apartment type, hotels featuring conventions and
social functions—both transient and residential hotels were included. No
resort or seasonal hotels were chosen.

It was found that the hotel industry centers in cities according to
their size. The cities of New York State were classified according to
population into first class cities of over 175,000; second class cities
of from 50,000 to 175,000; and third class cities of less than 50,000
population. It proved to be far more difficult to secure employment in
second and third class cities than in first class cities. In smaller
centers this was in part due to the greater stability of the labor force
and in the case of industrial cities to the unemployment situation. In
cities of a few controlling industries, which had closed down, the hotel
housekeepers invariably answered an inquiry for work with the statement
that the works had shut down and so they had long waiting lists for all
jobs.

                  *       *       *       *       *

The investigators applied for work in 96 hotels in New York State.


                        First class          47
                        cities

                           Buffalo       12

                           New York and  25
                        Brooklyn

                           Rochester     10

                        Second class         28
                        cities

                           Albany         7

                           Binghamton     3

                           Schenectady    4

                           Syracuse       8

                           Utica          6

                        Third class          21
                        cities

                           Elmira         2

                           Hudson         2

                           Ithaca         2

                           Kingston       2

                           Newburgh       3

                           Troy           4

                           Oswego         2

                           Poughkeepsie   4

                                            ___

                        Total                96


Work was secured in sixteen hotels, fourteen of which were in first
class cities, one in Rochester, two in Buffalo, and eleven in New York
and Brooklyn. One job was secured in Syracuse, a second class city, and
one in Troy, a city of the third class.

                  *       *       *       *       *

[Sidenote: Occupations Covered]

It is impossible to give the exact percentage of women to men employed
in hotels. A recent survey has been made, however, by the United States
Bureau of Labor Statistics of hotels and restaurants in 26 cities. This
report shows that 40% of the employees in hotels and restaurants are
women.[1] The percentage for hotels alone would undoubtedly be larger
because men are usually employed as waiters in the larger restaurants
and in restaurants there is no large group of women chambermaids as in
hotels.

Footnote 1:

  United States Bureau of Labor Statistics. Wages of Hotel and
  Restaurant Employees. 1919. (Advance Release 486, Sept. 31, 1921.)

Of the women in hotels, 56% are in the housekeeping department; 23% in
the kitchen, dining room and pantry departments; and 20% in
miscellaneous departments.[2] The miscellaneous departments comprise
office employees, laundry workers, elevator, telephone and telegraph
operators, seamstresses, wrap checkers and newsstand salesgirls. They
have been excluded from this study on the ground that they are not
typical of the hotel industry and may be studied under their respective
occupations. Since newsstands and checking rooms are usually
concessions, the investigators felt they could not be adequately dealt
with but should be separately investigated.

More than half of the women workers in hotels are employed in the
housekeeping department. 40.2% of the women in hotels are chambermaids,
10% cleaners or bathmaids, 2% linen room girls and 3.8% housekeepers.[2]
Housekeepers have been excluded from this study because of the small
percentage and the difficulty in securing information. The study of the
housekeeping department, therefore, is confined to chambermaids,
cleaners, bathmaids and linen room workers. The investigators worked in
14 jobs in the housekeeping department as chambermaid, bathmaid and
linen room worker.

Footnote 2:

  Minimum Wage Board of the District of Columbia. Wages of Women in
  Hotels and Restaurants. 1919. P. 10.

In the kitchen, cooks and assistant cooks are excluded on the ground of
number. The information in the kitchen, dining room and pantry
departments is, therefore, confined to waitresses and pantry workers.
Two jobs were obtained in the kitchen as pantry worker. No work could be
obtained as a waitress. All information regarding waitresses was secured
from interviews with workers.

                  *       *       *       *       *

[Sidenote: Labor Recruiting]

During the war the hotels of New York City found that advertisements,
private fee-charging employment agencies and bulletins posted at the
employees’ entrance, were bringing in inadequate returns. The New York
City Hotel Men’s Association, therefore, opened its own free employment
bureau, which served as a clearing house for all jobs open in hotels
belonging to the Association in New York City. One hotel company opened
its own employment bureau to recruit workers for the five hotels under
its management. This proved to be a temporary expedient only, to be used
at a time when the hotels were in need of workers. When unemployment,
due to the industrial depression, grew, the free employment bureaus were
discontinued. This was at a time when the workers most needed them. The
basis for the closing of the employment bureaus was voiced by one
employment manager, “We don’t need to do that now; we have a long line
at the door every day for every job.”

                  *       *       *       *       *

At present there is a return to the use of the advertisement and private
employment agency. The old, unintelligent method of hiring the first
worker in line after a casual interview, whether or not more suitable
candidates may be available, is again the practice. In all but five of
the hotels in which work was applied for the timekeeper and the head of
the department interviewed the worker. It is true that some of the
larger hotels in New York City under the control of big hotel
corporations have developed employment departments. The employment
managers have no labor policy, however. They are little more than
clerks. They receive calls from the heads of departments and refer
workers to them as they apply. No central record is kept. No job
specifications have been worked out and no record is kept of the workers
who leave. Even where there are employment managers the actual hiring is
done by the heads of departments whose attitude is only too often,
“These girls won’t stay long anyway, so it doesn’t much matter who is
hired.”

                  *       *       *       *       *

The following example illustrates how unintelligently an interview can
be carried on by a housekeeper who was apparently an excellent manager
of her department in other respects. The bad psychology and entire lack
of employment technique in the interview is obvious. The interview took
place in a first class hotel of a first class city in New York State.
The girl waited for three-quarters of an hour outside the linen room.
Finally, the housekeeper, a robust, emphatic person, came up the stairs.
The girl took the initiative:

    “Are you the housekeeper?”

    “Yes,” in a forbidding tone.

    “Do you need any chambermaids?” She gave the girl an appraising
    look. She seemed to suspend judgment temporarily.

    “Why, yes,” she replied ungraciously, “I do need a steady girl.
    Are you a floater?”

    “No, I’m not a floater,” was the quick reply suggested to the
    girl. The housekeeper looked skeptical, but went on.

    “Where’ve you worked?”

    “—— in Albany.”

    “Oh,” and she registered faint satisfaction, “that’s the same
    management as this hotel,” then, hardening again, “and did you
    get tired of that?”

    “Oh, no,” replied the candidate, quick to get her cue, “I liked
    it. I had to leave when we moved away from there.” The
    housekeeper was mollified.

    “You live here now?”

    “Yes, I’m goin’ to. I ain’t got any people. I come from Lake
    George,” showing she was a floater after all.

    “You sure you ain’t a floater and you’ll come Sundays, every
    Sunday and take your night watches?” suggesting to the girl that
    she will expect her to be skipping Sunday and watches. “Well,
    wages is $10.50 a week, live out, hours 8-3 with night watch
    every 20th night from 6 to 11 P.M. When can you start?”

    “Tomorrow.”

    “All right, now don’t go back on me, will you?” implying that
    the girls usually do.

    Then, as an afterthought, “What’s your name?”

    “Minnie ——, ma’am.”

    “All right, Minnie, 8 o’clock tomorrow. Now don’t you go back on
    me, mind!”

                  *       *       *       *       *

[Sidenote: Getting a job in a hotel]

Now that the hotels’ employment agency is no longer open, a girl setting
out to look for a job in a New York hotel first looks over the “Help
Wanted” column in the New York World. There she may find advertisements
such as these:


    Wanted:
      Chambermaid, with hotel experience, call before 10 A.M. Hotel ——;
      Live in.

    Wanted:
      Waitress, young girl, call before 10 A.M. Hotel ——.


Details are seldom given regarding wages or hours. If she is experienced
she has a notion as to which are “good houses” so she rates the hotels
in her mind and starts out early Monday morning to apply to them for a
job.

Failing to find advertisements in the paper—and she does fail very
often, for the labor supply in hotels is abundant—she makes the rounds
of hotels, tipped off by a friend as to the best places to work. Or she
joins the throng which files in and out of the hotel agencies on Sixth
Avenue. The agency is usually on the second or third floor of a building
with its sign in the doorway on the street floor. Under the sign are
daily bulletin boards where the agency posts the “Jobs Open Today.” On
the one side are jobs for men, on the other jobs for women. The girl
stops to pour over these with a motley crew of women, young and old,
trim and slattern, of all nationalities.


                    “Pantry      $40 a    Live in
                    girl         month

                    Waitress     $30 a    Live in
                                 month

                    Chambermaid   $25 a   Live in,”
                                 month


she reads. If she finds anything to interest her, she ascends the
several flights of dark stairs leading to the agency offices. She finds
the employment agency divided into two parts, the men’s department and
the women’s department. Behind a railing at one end is the interviewer
of women, seated at a desk, talking to applicants one by one. In front
of the railing in groups sit the candidates for jobs. There are neat
waitresses, pretty Irish chambermaids, intelligent, mature pantry women,
buxom Italian cooks, fat little bathmaids and cleaners, who are
beginning to despair of getting a job anywhere. Conversation is animated
and loud, often in brogue and broken English. It concerns disputes
between housekeepers and maids, the awful hours and food in some hotels,
the Irish question, prohibition, and how foreigners are taking girls’
jobs.

Finally the interviewer turns and says, “Come on in. What are you
looking for?” and she tells the candidate what jobs she has open and
that she must obligate herself to pay the agency 10 per cent of her
first month’s salary if she gets a job through it. Then the girl gets a
card from the interviewer directing her to a job. The employment office
is not careful to conserve the worker’s time or money. It is a
commercial institution bent on profit. It sends her out to a hotel which
wanted a chambermaid yesterday or early in the morning, without first
telephoning to find out if the job is still open. It even “books” her
for a job out-of-town with the most meager information regarding
conditions in the hotel, although the worker is required to sign a
contract to stay for a definite period of time. So she often finds
herself, after visiting the agency, with a day lost, carfare lost and
nothing gained, or a job secured which she finds it is impossible to
keep because of some unknown disadvantages.

The hotel worker reflects, therefore, before going on a job recommended
by the agency, deterred also by the 10 per cent fee. She will look
around for herself and return here as a last resort. So she goes the
round of the individual hotels again. When she reaches a hotel she walks
to the rear hunting the employees’ entrance. It is not hard to
distinguish. It is indicated by an opening in the sidewalk and a steeply
descending flight of iron steps, often circular, leading to the basement
or second basement. These are often slippery and dark. They lead into an
ill-lighted passage at the bottom, littered with storeroom supplies, old
bottles, casks, bags of potatoes, etc. She has not made much progress
before she is hailed by the timekeeper from his cage behind the time
clock near the door.

“Hey, what do you want,” he calls, “a job?” Sometimes he is scarcely so
civil. She states her errand; she wants a job as a chambermaid, a
waitress or a pantry girl, as the case may be. Sometimes she meets
absolute discouragement from the timekeeper. Sometimes he is more
good-natured and directs her to the housekeeper or the steward and shows
her the way to the elevator. So she continues along the passage, dodging
puddles and dripping pipes.

If she is a chambermaid, she goes to the housekeeper’s office or the
linen room. There she sits on a bench outside the door waiting audience
along with other applying bathmaids and cleaners,—talking again about
how awful it is to work in a hotel. When she does see the housekeeper,
she is greeted with a roughly appraising look.

“Hotel experience?”

“Yes, ma’am.”

“Where?” and “how long?”

But it is her appearance which counts, not her experience. If the
candidate is young and nice looking, undeformed, and there is a job
open, she will get it. If she is older and getting fat, all the
experience in the world will do her no good. Her looks demote her to the
bathmaid class and she will find it hard to get a job as that. So she is
casual in giving her experience and she is casually hired. She doesn’t
learn much about the wages and hours or about the food and the room she
is to have if she is to live in.

The girl decides to try it out for herself to see if it is “a good house
for tips, how much you can pick up from the floor, what the watches are,
how hard they work you, and what the grub and rooms are like.” If she
doesn’t make out she’ll leave—it doesn’t much matter. She would do
something else if she got half a chance—but she’ll stick to this awhile
anyway.

                  *       *       *       *       *

[Sidenote: Learning the ways of the hotel]

During the first few days in the hotel, she is shoved about and utterly
lost. Perhaps no one even asks her name for several days. She doesn’t
know where her “station” or her “floor” is and how much territory it
covers. She doesn’t know where the time clock is, where to get her meal
ticket, where meals are served, where the toilets and dressing rooms
are, where to get supplies and bed linen. She fumbles about “lost like”
until she learns for herself. Sometimes she grows discouraged and leaves
in the first few days. Sometimes she finds a friend who shows her
around, takes her down to lunch, tells her what the rules are, and
introduces her to her friends.

There were, of course, a few exceptions. In several cases rules and
regulations were posted in linen closets and pantries and occasionally
the housekeeper would put a new worker in charge of another girl to
learn the rules. All hotels required the new worker to sign a contract
stating that she would obey the rules of the establishment and would
allow her baggage to be searched. The contracts seemed meaningless in
that in most cases the workers had no way of knowing what the rules and
regulations of the hotel were.

                  *       *       *       *       *

[Sidenote: The training of new employees]

As for learning her job, “You’re experienced, aren’t you? Well, then,
you know what to do,” and the housekeeper dismisses all responsibility.
The idea that any woman knows how to do chamber work or cleaning is
prevalent in the housekeeping department. The girl is left to work
alone, then scolded for her mistakes or even discharged without notice.
One worker was turned out at 4 o’clock in the afternoon with no money
and another girl put in her bed that night because the housekeeper
“didn’t like the way she swept.” In a few exceptional cases the
housekeeper taught the new girls by the “you watch me” method.

The failure of hotels to train their employees was pointed out by the
United States Federal Board of Vocational Education which had been
requested by the American Hotel Association to make an investigation of
the possibilities for vocational training in the industry. The report
points out that the hotel industry has developed so fast from a home
industry that managers have not perfected their organization. Department
heads have not been instructed that one of their functions is the
training of new workers. The report stresses the fact that training must
be based on a clear definition of jobs and that jobs have not yet been
analyzed by the management. “As hotel men pay more attention to training
and promotion of deserving employees, there will be greater inducement
to capable young people to enter the business. Such opportunities for
training and promotion will also lessen the turnover of labor and
consequently lessen the cost of operation.”[3] In New York State there
seems little indication that hotels have profited by this report.

Footnote 3:

  L. S. Hawkins, representing the Federal Board of Vocational Education.
  Vocational Education in the Hotel Business, A Report to the American
  Hotel Association of the United States and Canada. P. 10.

                  *       *       *       *       *

[Sidenote: Transfers and Promotion]

There was no such thing as a transfer or promotion policy in hotels
where work was obtained. The nearest approach to it was found in one
hotel where in the housekeeping department women were sometimes taken on
as bathmaids at $25 a month and later became chambermaids at $28 a
month. There their advancement ceased. Some hotels have rules that no
chambermaids may be promoted to linen room workers. There was no
cooperation between departments in transferring workers from one
department to another.


------------------------------------------------------------------------




                                 HOURS


One of the most important conditions of work to the woman hotel employee
is the number and distribution of the hours she works. As the hotel
industry is a continuous one, most departments operate 18 out of the 24
hours. Within these 18 hours, as has already been pointed out, there are
peaks of work when a larger force is necessary. Broken shifts and long
and short working days are the result. The working days are made even
more irregular by lack of regular lunch periods and regular closing time
for those workers who live in the hotel.

The length and distribution of hours is so different for the different
departments that it is necessary to discuss the housekeeping department
and the kitchen, pantry and dining room departments separately.


                        Housekeeping Department

The function of the housekeeping department in a hotel is the housing of
guests. It has sole charge of the bedroom floors. The function of the
women workers in this department is to clean the bedrooms and corridors,
to change the linen on the beds, to dust and sweep, supply fresh towels
and soap and care for the baths, private and public. The bulk of this
work falls in the daylight hours when guests have risen and gone about
their business. In the large transient hotels, however, guests are
coming into the hotel and leaving it until midnight. Part of the workers
must, therefore, be on hand to attend to the incidental wants of the
guests and make up new rooms at night.

The women employed in greatest numbers in the housekeeping department
are the chambermaids, who clean rooms and make the beds, the bathmaids,
who clean and scrub out the bathrooms and corridors and the special
cleaners. Of these, the bathmaids’ and cleaners’ work falls in fairly
regular shifts. Bathmaids work a day shift and cleaners, in the big
hotels, work a day and a night shift. Chambermaids, on the other hand,
have night work distributed among them according to the needs of the
establishment.

                  *       *       *       *       *

[Sidenote: Bathmaids’ and cleaners’ hours]

The work of the bathmaids and the cleaners is, perhaps, the hardest
women have to do in hotels. All day long they scrub out wash basins,
tubs and toilets, polish brass, and mop up floors on their hands and
knees. Their work is of fairly uniform intensity. It is “humiliating
work,” as one bathmaid said, and for this reason the higher type of maid
refuses to take it. The hours of the bathmaids are, however, the best in
the housekeeping department. This has led some chambermaids in spite of
prejudice against the work to prefer bathmaids’ jobs. In thirteen hotels
in which work was obtained in the housekeeping department bathmaids
worked a nine-hour day or less. The hours of work fell between 7.30 and
5 o’clock. In two hotels, they worked 8½-hour days, 7 hotels a 7½-hour
day, in 3 hotels a 7-hour day and in one hotel a 6½-hour day.[4] Lunch
periods were unstandardized, as most of the bathmaids ate in the hotels.

Footnote 4:

  The hours given are exclusive of the lunch period. One-half hour has
  been deducted in computing the daily hour schedules.

The special cleaners worked the same daily hours as bathmaids. In some
hotels there was a squad of night cleaners also who worked from 6 P.M.
to 12 midnight, and in the largest hotels there was another shift
working from 12 midnight until 7 A.M. No information could be secured
concerning these night shifts.

The weekly hours for bathmaids in the hotels varied from 45 to 54 hours.
In five of the nine hotels for which weekly hours were obtained
bathmaids were required to work from 45 to 50 hours a week and in four
hotels from 50 to 54 hours a week. The weekly hours for bathmaids are
long in spite of a fairly short working day because they work a
seven-day week. The Sunday hours are shorter than hours for week days,
varying from 5½ to 7 hours. Sunday work for bathmaids seems unnecessary.
The guests stay in their rooms late Sunday morning and do not wish to be
disturbed by cleaning. Bathmaids are used to clean outmaids’ closets and
corridors and to take the places of the chambermaids who have failed to
report for Sunday work. Because they have no regular work to do on
Sunday, bathmaids highly resent the imposition of Sunday work. As their
work is of an especially fatiguing nature they believe they are entitled
to one day of rest. “It’s mean to call you in on Sunday and keep you
sitting around when you might be home resting or off having a good
time,” they would say. In three of the hotels bathmaids were given two
days off a month or every other Sunday.

                  *       *       *       *       *

[Sidenote: Chambermaids’ Hours]

The large majority of workers in the housekeeping department are
chambermaids. The hours of work for chambermaids are the most
unstandardized of those of any occupation in the hotel. They vary
greatly from establishment to establishment. Different maids in the same
hotel work different hours, and hours differ for each maid on successive
days of the week. This has made it difficult to give a general statement
of the working hours of chambermaids.

In transient hotels chambermaids work a daily shift in which they change
the linen, dust, and sweep in an assigned number of rooms. This work
falls within a fairly regular period. In addition they take turns at
being on watch in the morning from 7 o’clock to 8, in the afternoon from
4 to 6 o’clock, and at night from 6 to 12 o’clock, or 6 to 10, according
to the establishment. Maids have an irregular lunch period also, except
a small minority in a few hotels who were found to take an hour and go
home. The workers leave the floor in many hotels when they have finished
their daily work often several hours earlier than the leaving time
scheduled. On the other hand, they are often kept beyond the scheduled
leaving hour because there is a shortage of linen and they must wait for
it in order to make up their rooms.

Extra shifts or watches occur in frequencies of from one watch every
twentieth night to one watch every morning, afternoon or evening. In two
hotels no night watch for the regular chambermaids occurred. A relief
watch of maids was added to the staff to work from 6 to 12 o’clock. In
one of the hotels this was installed as an economy measure. In several
other hotels night watches were made optional and extra pay was received
by a maid for each watch taken. Under this system some maids, in order
to increase their earnings, might overtax their strength. Night watch in
the smaller cities lasted only until 10 o’clock and occurred at less
frequent intervals.

When a girl complains of long hours, the housekeeper usually replies
that there is a nice short day on Sunday. The maids do not take this as
a great consolation, for they regard one full day’s rest in seven as
their right. In all but two hotels in which jobs were held, a straight
seven-day week was worked by all chambermaids. The Sunday hours were
shorter, workers usually leaving at 2 P.M. instead of 4 P.M. In the
other two hotels two days off each month were allowed. These days off
were most irregularly given, however, at the discretion of the
housekeeper. If there was a shortage of maids, there were no days off.
One worker in one of these hotels said she had been there two months and
had worked every day.

In 12 of the 14 hotels[5] in which jobs were obtained as chambermaids
the regular daily shift varied from 6½ hours to 8½ hours, exclusive of
the lunch period. The regular weekly shifts varied from 45½ to 59½
hours. _But the extra shifts make the weekly hours worked by
chambermaids excessively long._ The average number of hours worked
weekly in “extra watches” varied from none to 21.04 hours. The actual
working hours for chambermaids, by which is meant the regular weekly
hours plus the average number of extra hours each week, in the 12
hotels, are as follows:


    49.38
    50.16
    50.75
    50.94
    52.50
    52.50
    54.50
    56.70
    59.27
    60.90
    66.54
    70.03


In no case is a 48-hour week found, and it can be seen that in over half
of the hotels chambermaids worked more than 54 hours.

Footnote 5:

  Two hotels have been omitted from the analysis of hours because of
  inadequate information on extra shifts.


                             CHART SHOWING

              ACTUAL WEEKLY HOURS WORKED BY A CHAMBERMAID
                       IN ONE NEW YORK CITY HOTEL

              7 AM 8 AM 12 NOON 1 PM 3 PM 4 PM 6 PM 9 PM 10 PM 12
                 MIDNIGHT

    MONDAY        ==  ===============  ===============

    TUESDAY =============== =============== ============
       ===================

    WEDNESDAY         ===============  ========================

    THURSDAY      ==  ===============  ===============

    FRIDAY            ===============  ===============     ============

    SATURDAY          ===============  ========================

    SUNDAY        ==  ===============  ==========


The chart on the opposite page shows the weekly hours actually worked by
chambermaids in one sample hotel in New York City. Beside her regular
hours the chambermaid had the morning watch from 7 to 8 A.M., with time
allowed for her to run down and eat her breakfast. The second day there
was a long watch from 6 P.M. to 12 P.M., the following day a short
afternoon watch from 4 to 6 P.M., and every third afternoon after four
o’clock she had to herself.

                  *       *       *       *       *

[Sidenote: Hours of linen room workers]

Linen room workers worked a long and short day. They usually reported at
8 o’clock and worked until 11 or 12 o’clock one day. They were then off
until 6 and worked until 12 midnight. The next day they worked from 12
noon to 6 P.M.

                  *       *       *       *       *

[Sidenote: Physical effects of excessive hours of work]

In all hotels where “extra watches” were worked the maids felt the
strain of the excessive hours. On days on which an extra watch from 6 to
12 was worked, a maid was on her feet from 8 to 4, then with two hours’
respite from 6 to 12, or 14 hours a day, with short intervals off for
meals. She came to her work the next day with dragging step and a
listless air, complaining that she never got rested. Her habits of life
were disturbed by the irregularity of hours for succeeding days. She
snatched sleep when she could. After work maids always went to their
rooms to rest until supper time. Workers living out frequently kept beds
in the hotel on which to snatch sleep. The work is indoors in an
overheated hotel. Excessive hours prevent the maids from getting
sufficient exercise in the fresh air. It is impossible to keep in good
physical condition under such working conditions. The maids age
prematurely. “Oh, you think I am an old woman. I am only thirty. You’ll
look like me, too, if you stay here long.” Similar statements were made
by several of the maids. The bathmaids particularly were a jaded and
fatigued group of women workers. The older ones in New York City were
bent from constant stooping. Even strong, young Polish girls, who were
frequently found working as bathmaids in up-state cities, were so tired
out at night that they spent their evenings lying on their beds.

The complaint of maids regarding hours of work was general. In several
hotels there had been an organized protest to the manager against a
seven-day week. In one hotel, with the help of a union, maids were
organized and the night watch was abolished. For the most part, however,
complaint took the form of individual grumbling, dissatisfaction, and
changing of jobs. One worker greeted a new worker as she came into her
bedroom sick after a night watch on a very hot night, “They work you
like dogs here, you better not stay.” “I was so tired last night I could
have cried,” said another worker. “My feet were all swollen this
morning. These night watches will kill me yet.” Many complained of sore
feet and varicose veins from continual standing. Of the seven-day week,
one young maid said, “You don’t mind so much in the winter time, but in
the summer to see everybody going off to the country and you working all
day indoors in a hot, stuffy hotel, with never a day to go anywhere or
see your family—it’s terrible.”

                  *       *       *       *       *

[Sidenote: Effect of long hours on efficiency]

The hotel which installed a relief night shift for chambermaids as an
economy measure, was wise. After observing the overtired, listless maids
skimp their work the day following a long night watch, one cannot but
conclude that long hours of work for women are a bad business policy.
The tired worker not only does poor work herself, but she demoralizes
the other more alert workers on the force. “Just make up the beds with
the sheets that’s on ’em. Those people aren’t going out today anyway.
Give the rooms a lick and a promise, I say. I’m tired today,” is often
heard while the maids are eating lunch. A feeling of resentment against
long hours tends to make the workers dissatisfied and careless about
their work. All feeling of responsibility for good work is diminished
accordingly. In order to mollify maids, housekeepers allow them to leave
their stations as soon as they have covered the work on their daily
shift. This makes for hastily finished work and a further unstandardized
day. It means that, instead of all maids getting a regular number of
hours off duty, clever and unscrupulous individuals steal time at the
expense of others. The effect of long hours on attendance is marked.
Maids frequently take days off without pay. Some make a practice of
turning up for Sunday work several times a month only. And after the
continued strain of some months of night watches and seven-day week
work, maids feel they “need a vacation and a change” and leave their
jobs.

                  *       *       *       *       *

[Sidenote: Effect of long hours on recreation]

Maids who live in a hotel go out little unless they are very young.
After working hours they lie on their beds and sleep or gossip. When
they do leave the hotel it is either to go to mass or to find some
exciting form of amusement. The younger girls made “dates” casually with
guests and other men to go to the movies and Coney Island. Girls who are
more backward had often been nowhere outside the hotel, except to
church. A Danish girl, who was working in a large New York City hotel,
said she knew no one in New York City and had not been anywhere except
to go to church with another maid one Sunday and she wouldn’t go there
again because they all laughed at her when she took off her hat. She
said she was too tired to go to the movies at night because these night
watches were “fierce”—she was just tired all the time. She worked in one
of the hotels which had an extra watch every day. Another worker, a
young Polish bathmaid, complained, “I am too tired to ever go home and
see my people any more at night. I used to go every other night and I
get awful lonesome for them now, but I just can’t get cleaned up and
dress.” This girl was sixteen and had been working as a bathmaid for
three months. Another young bathmaid said, “I am too tired to ever go to
dances. I just want to rest at night. I can’t stand it anyway, it’s too
hard.”


              Dining Room, Kitchen and Pantry Departments

[Sidenote: Waitresses’ Hours]

The work of the waitress in a hotel reaches its peak at meal hours and
slackens between times. For this reason waitresses work “broken shifts.”
The daily and weekly hours of the waitresses interviewed were not as
unstandardized or as excessive in length as hours for chambermaids. They
worked a six-day week in all cases. But the distribution of hours of
work in broken shifts caused great inconvenience to the workers. Those
who lived in were apathetic but those who lived out and wished to return
home after hours of work complained bitterly. If the worker lives any
distance from the hotel it is impossible for her to change her clothes
twice, allow time for street car ride, and return to work in the rest
period allowed between the morning and the evening shift. There is,
besides, the expense of extra carfare to be considered.

In one New York City hotel, according to a woman worker’s statement, she
reported for work at 11 A.M. and worked till 4 P.M. She then left her
station for 1½ hours’ rest and returned at 5.30 to work until 9 P.M. She
ate her meals and changed her clothes upon her own time. She complained
that she could not go home in the afternoon because she lived too far
away to change to street clothes twice and allow for car rides. The
hotel had a rest room where she stayed for the 1½-hour rest period. “Of
course,” she said, “it is wasted time.” She worked no overtime, but the
work was heavy during the hours in which she worked so that she was
often too tired and nervous to eat her meals.

In another hotel a worker stated that she worked broken shifts one week
in the day time and straight shifts the next week when she was on night
work. One week she worked from 6 A.M. to 11 A.M., had a rest period from
11 A.M. to 6 P.M., and worked 6 P.M. to 9 P.M. The next week she worked
from 5.30 P.M. until 12 P.M. She ate her meals on her own time, but
changed her clothes on working time. Overtime varied from 1 to 1½ hours
a day.

In the third hotel for which information was secured the waitresses
lived in. The work was divided into three shifts; from 6.30 A.M. to 8.30
A.M., from 10.30 A.M. to 2.30 P.M., and from 5.30 P.M. to 7.30 P.M. This
makes an 8-hour day if only the hours actually worked are counted in.

                  *       *       *       *       *

[Sidenote: Hours of pantry maids and kitchen help]

In the kitchen and pantry the hours range from 8 to 9 daily with a
six-day week. Here again the broken shifts and the long and short day
were found. In the two hotels where jobs were obtained in the kitchens
and pantries, there were two groups of women dishwashers, a day shift
and a night shift. The day shift worked from 7 A.M. to 4 P.M., or an
8½-hour day, exclusive of ½ hour for lunch. The night shift worked from
4 P.M. to 1 A.M., or an 8½-hour day. They worked six days, or a 51-hour
week.

The other workers in the pantry and kitchen of one of these hotels
worked broken shifts. The workers had rotating shifts with a long day
and then a short day. On the day before the weekly day off, each worker
worked a 12 or 13-hour day. The irregularity of a pantry worker’s hours
and the distribution over a seven-day period, is shown on the chart on
the following page. The length of working hours for the worker in this
instance ranged from 6 to 13 hours daily. On days on which the long
shift was worked, the hours were distributed over a period of 18 hours.
The total weekly hours of this pantry worker were 63. The two other
pantry workers in this hotel worked a 56-hour week and a 60-hour week,
respectively. Since a girl always worked a long day of 12 to 13 hours
before her free day, she was unable to derive full benefit from it
because of fatigue.


                             CHART SHOWING

    ACTUAL WEEKLY HOURS OF A PANTRY WORKER IN A NEW YORK CITY HOTEL.

              6 AM 7 AM 12 NOON 1 PM 6 PM 8 PM 12 MIDNIGHT 1 AM

    MONDAY      ==========         ====================

    TUESDAY               ===============

    WEDNESDAY   =============       ====================

    THURSDAY                  DAY-OFF

    FRIDAY      ==========         =====================

    SATURDAY              ===============

    SUNDAY_     ==========         ====================


As the other hotel in which a pantry job was held was much larger,
pantry and kitchen work was more specialized. There were pantry maids,
coffee women, butter and cream women, and vegetable women. The butter
and cream women and the pantry maids (salad girls) had the most
irregular shifts. Two pantry maids worked a straight shift from 7 A.M.
to 4 P.M. or a 9-hour day; two worked broken shifts from 8 A.M. to 2
P.M. and from 6 P.M. to 8 P.M., or an 8-hour day; and one worked from 4
P.M. to 1 A.M., a 9-hour day. These women ate their meals on the job so
no time has been deducted for lunch hours.

                  *       *       *       *       *

[Sidenote: The effect of broken and irregular shifts on the worker]

Broken shifts distributed over a long period of time with scheduled
hours of work changing from day to day are a great hardship to the woman
worker. Aside from the fact that two hours in the middle of the
afternoon are useless to a woman if she must dress and take a car to go
home, and take a car to return and dress again on reaching the hotel,
broken shifts mean that meals and sleep must be snatched at irregular
intervals. Such a hit or miss existence, with no regular hours for work,
rest and recreation, does not make for the physical well-being of the
worker.


------------------------------------------------------------------------




                                 WAGES


When taking a position in a hotel the woman worker bargains as an
individual for the wages she is to receive. She is without the support
of a labor organization which would have set a standard for her
occupation and would assist her in maintaining it. She applies for work
in an industry where the wage scales are determined largely by the
inclination of the hotel managers and by the labor supply. She must go
from hotel to hotel to learn what is being paid, for the wage
opportunities vary from establishment to establishment.

She cannot even estimate the value of the wage she is to receive in the
majority of jobs. This is due to two uncertain elements in the earnings
of hotel workers; tipping and compensation other than money in the form
of board and room. Because she is not in a position to gauge the amount
of the tips she will receive and the quality of the board and lodging,
the only recourse of the applicant is to try out the job for a time.
“Well, I’ll try it out for a week and see how I make out,” is the common
expression of the new worker. If it is not a good house for tips, if she
can’t eat the food, and if the living-in conditions are unbearable, she
will go somewhere else and try again. By trying out job after job she
loses time and greatly decreases her yearly earnings.


                               Cash Wages

[Sidenote: Wages when the workers live out]

In the smaller hotels of New York City and the hotels of the smaller
cities of the State, a straight cash wage was paid to women workers in
all occupations. The wages of chambermaids and bathmaids varied from
$8.77 a week to $16 in the 46 hotels where wage rates were obtained. Of
these, the one hotel paying $8.77 a week was the largest hotel of a
second class city where two large factories employing great numbers of
women had closed down. The housekeeper said, “The works have shut down,
so you can get workers at any price.” The one hotel paying $16 a week
employed only three maids on a long-hour schedule.

The straight cash wages paid to chambermaids and bathmaids in the 46
hotels are as follows:


                  1  paid at   $8 but less   $9   per
                      least         than         week

                  9   "  "      9   "   "    10  "   "

                 11   "  "     10   "   "    11  "   "

                  9   "  "     11   "   "    12  "   "

                 11   "  "     12   "   "    13  "   "

                  2   "  "     13   "   "    14  "   "

                  2   "  "     14   "   "    15  "   "

                  0   "  "     15   "   "    16  "   "

                1[6]  "  "     16   "   "    17  "   "


Footnote 6:

  The actual wage paid in this group was $16.00.

Few women workers were employed in the kitchens and pantries of these
hotels. No waitresses were employed.

A comparison of these wage rates may be made with the minimum wage fixed
for hotel workers in 1919 in the District of Columbia where the cost of
living is comparable to that of New York State. The Minimum Wage Board
of the District of Columbia decided that a wage of $16.50 a week was the
minimum on which a self-supporting woman could live. In no case do the
hotels investigated in New York State pay this minimum when a straight
cash wage is paid and the workers do not live in the hotels. It can be
seen from these figures that 40 of the 46 hotels pay between $9 and $13
or an average of $11 per week.

                  *       *       *       *       *

[Sidenote: Wages including lodging but no meals]

In six hotels at which jobs were applied for, lodging was offered, but
no meals. The following cash wages were offered to chambermaids and
bathmaids in addition to lodging:


                  1  paid at   $8 but less   $9   per
                      least         than         week

                  3   "   "     9   "   "    10  "   "

                  1   "   "    10   "   "    11  "   "

                  1   "   "    11   "   "    12  "   "


No information was obtained for pantry workers or waitresses in this
group.

The Minimum Wage Board of the District of Columbia, in extending its
minimum wage of $16.50 to hotel workers who were living-in, attempted to
set a money value on the board and lodging furnished by the hotel.
Because there was no way of determining its actual cost to the hotel
management, the minimum cost of room and board for a self-supporting
woman in the District of Columbia was taken. The figure used is $9 a
week for board and lodging; two-thirds or $6 for board, and one-third or
$3 for lodging.[7] $13.50 is, therefore, the minimum on which a woman
can maintain herself while living-in in a hotel but taking her meals
outside. None of the hotels in New York State, furnishing lodging in
addition to a cash wage, paid this minimum.

Footnote 7:

  Minimum Wage Board of the District of Columbia. Wages of Women in
  Hotels and Restaurants in the District of Columbia. P. 16.

                  *       *       *       *       *

[Sidenote: Wages including three meals and no lodging]

In 8 hotels which paid the workers their wage, plus three meals a day,
the following cash wages were paid to chambermaids and bathmaids:


                  1  paid at   $6 but less   $7   per
                      least         than         week

                  0   "   "     7   "   "     8  "   "

                  1   "   "     8   "   "     9  "   "

                  5   "   "     9   "   "    10  "   "

               1[8]   "   "    10   "   "    11  "   "


Footnote 8:

  The actual wage paid in this group was $10.00.

No information was obtained for pantry workers or waitresses in this
group.

If the $16.50 minimum wage of the District of Columbia is taken, and $6
to cover the cost of three meals deducted, the minimum wage for this
group would be $10.50. In no case was this amount received.

                  *       *       *       *       *

[Sidenote: Wages including board and lodging]

The largest New York City hotels and the largest hotels in first class
cities require maids to live in and prefer that some of the pantry
workers and waitresses should do so. In these hotels chambermaids and
bathmaids living-in have the following wage rates:


                  1  paid at   $4 but less   $5   per
                      least         than         week

                  7   "   "     5   "   "     6  "   "

                 17   "   "     6   "   "     7  "   "

                  1   "   "     7   "   "     8  "   "

                  2   "   "     8   "   "     9  "   "

                  1   "   "     9   "   "    10  "   "


If $9 for board and lodging is deducted from the $16.50 minimum wage of
the District of Columbia, $7.50 is left as the minimum wage for this
group of workers. When the wages of chambermaids living-in are taken, it
will be noted that only four out of twenty-nine hotels pay this wage or
more, and that over half pay between $6 and $7 per week.

Waitresses in one hotel in New York City where board and room are
furnished received $6.92 a week. Pantry workers, who are a skilled
class, received one of the highest wage rates found for women workers in
hotels. They have, however, no access to tips. In one hotel they
received $50 a month with board and lodging, or $11.53 a week, and in
another hotel $55 a month with board and lodging, or $12.29 a week. In
two hotels kitchen workers received $30 a month whether they lived in or
out.


                                Tipping

Tips, or the giving of gratuities by the patrons of the hotel to workers
who serve them, is the most unstandardized part of the earnings of the
worker. Because the giving of tips depends not only on the whim of the
public but upon the general prosperity of the country and the individual
prosperity of the patron, it admits of no standardization. Tipping seems
incongruous in that, by its own definition, the function of the hotel is
service. It amounts to a direct payment by the public of a part of the
worker’s wage.

It should be remembered that tips are received by chambermaids and
waitresses only. There are large numbers of bathmaids, cleaners, pantry
and kitchen help who have no access to tips.

                  *       *       *       *       *

[Sidenote: The disadvantages of tipping]

The practice of tipping is defended by both workers and managers,
although it operates to the disadvantage of both. The management defends
tipping on the ground that the public wishes to tip. “He feels the
servant has given something extra and unexpected and he wants to pay
something for it—he tips.”[9] This manager indirectly admits, however,
that tipping is an imposition on the patron when he assures his guests
that no discourtesy will be shown a guest who does not tip. If managers
were candid they might admit that they wish the public to tip because it
enables them to pay their employees a lower wage rate.

Footnote 9:

  Statler Service Codes. P. 7.

Patrons are frequently annoyed by the persistency of workers in
procuring tips. The guest who tips will get service at the expense of
the guest who doesn’t—maids are frank to admit this—and there is
consequently dissatisfaction of one class of guests. A guest in a hotel
has come to feel that the hotel rate is but one item in the expense of
staying there and naturally he resents it.

Between the workers and their superiors disputes arise over the
distribution of tips. Dissatisfaction and lack of cooperation result
which obstruct the smooth functioning of departments. Chambermaids
designate desk clerks as “sneaking devils,” because they think the desk
clerk takes their tips. They hate the bell-boys because they think they
get more than their share of tips. Waitresses, especially banquet
waitresses, have a constant grudge against head waiters. They think they
hold back a large share of tips from them. Maids resent it when
housekeepers give them transient corridors where tips are poor, and
waitresses accuse head waiters of putting them on poor stations.

Tips are a disadvantage to the worker because she can never know what
her weekly earnings are to be and plan her expenses accordingly. But she
defends tipping because she feels that this is the only part of her
earnings over which she has control. She knows her wage rate will be
low, but she may get big tips through her own efforts. The uncertainty
of the amount of tips has a romantic fascination for the maid or
waitress. She thinks that by an ingratiating manner to the guest, by
staying overtime to be on the spot when a guest leaves, by her
persistence, and by chance of securing a good floor or station she will
get tipped. Moreover, she has heard many stories of good tips. Maids and
waitresses boast of the good tips they receive and remain silent when
they get none. Each maid hopes that she will be the lucky one. But she
comes to realize reluctantly that she cannot control tips. She may not
get a good floor if she is a chambermaid but one on which transients
stop for one night and are never seen. In modern hotels the “regulars”
stop on the higher floors. She may not obtain favor with the housekeeper
or the desk clerk or the head waiter. She may be at lunch or supper when
a guest leaves. She may be growing old and the guest will not be pleased
by her manner. The lot of the older chambermaid who is in many respects
more efficient than the younger one, is especially hard. She does not
get tips and she ceases to expect them. This discrimination against the
experienced worker illustrates the unfairness of tips as a part of the
workers’ wage. Tips depend not so much on service as on a pleasing
appearance and manner. Advice to a new maid is to “fix yourself up” and
“don’t be bashful. The ones who get tips are those who stick around and
sass ’em back and make them notice you.” There is a question as to how
many of the tips received are legitimate tips. The danger to a young
girl, who ingratiates herself with the guests to get tips, is only too
evident. The girls often said to those who got no tips, “Oh, you’re too
straight to make good tips. Make up to them.”

The dissatisfaction of the maid who gets low tips grows and finally she
leaves her job. An employment manager of a large group of hotels in New
York City said, “From my experience as employment manager, I am
thoroughly convinced that the tipping system is more directly
responsible for labor turnover in hotels than any other one thing. An
employee will leave one hotel to go to another where exactly the same
wages are paid if she thinks the chance for tips is better.”

                  *       *       *       *       *

[Sidenote: The relation of tipping to wages]

Tipping, as a factor in the workers’ earnings, has been generally
overestimated. A study, made by the United States Bureau of Labor
Statistics during the war period when tipping was comparatively high,
shows that the average tip for a chambermaid in Buffalo was 40¢ a day
and the highest was only 71¢. In New York City the average tip received
by the chambermaids was 49¢ and the highest tip 83¢.[10] The Minimum
Wage Board of the District of Columbia in 1919 says of tipping: “Of the
48 maids from whom data on this point were obtained, 8 stated that they
received no tips, 7 stated the amount to be very little and the average
for those giving actual figures was $1.22 per week. It seems evident
that the tips received by maids were not sufficient to make any
appreciable addition to their wages.”[11]

Footnote 10:

  Monthly Labor Review, September 1919. Wages and Hours of Hotel and
  Restaurant Employees. P. 193.

Footnote 11:

  Minimum Wage Board of the District of Columbia. Wages of Women in
  Hotels and Restaurants. 1919. P. 5.

Certainly in New York State, according to the data gathered from this
investigation, tipping for chambermaids is negligible. It is difficult
to get an accurate estimate from maids as to their average weekly tips.
They remember a $5 tip they once got but not how much they get each
week. In one of the largest New York hotels, one maid says she gets $5
once in a while, then nothing for weeks at a time. One had had $3 in the
three months she had worked in the hotel. Another made 50 cents in 5
days. The investigators, while working in hotels, received less than $1
a week in New York City hotels and in the other hotels of New York State
only an occasional small tip of from 15 to 25 cents. It may have been
due in part to the fact that as new maids they worked on corridors for
transients and not for permanent guests. Their experience, however, was
borne out by statements of other maids. There was constant complaint
that tips were low. In up-state cities maids said, “You never expect
tips from travelling men any more. Only when a play actress or somebody
like that comes from New York you get a tip.” In New York City also
there was complaint that “houses are no good for tips now” and “no rich
people come any more.”

Waitresses, the few whom it was possible to interview, received much
larger tips than maids. It is more customary to tip waitresses and they
are always on the spot to receive their tips. Waitresses interviewed
received from $3 to $5 a day in tips. They form, however, a minority of
women hotel workers and their position in the industry is precarious,
due to the antagonism of the men waiters.

That a hotel can be run without tips has been demonstrated by a women’s
hotel in Washington, D. C., in which a minimum wage of $16.50 is paid. A
group of restaurants in New York City realizing the unfairness of the
tipping system, has attempted a standardization of tips. The patron pays
a 10% service charge with his bill, which per cent goes to the waiter at
the end of the week. This seems entirely satisfactory to the worker in
that it makes for a certainty of tips, but the pernicious principle
underlying the tipping system persists.


                               Living-in

The other uncertain element in a woman hotel worker’s earnings is the
board and lodging offered as a part of her wage. When a girl takes a job
she does not see her room and has no notion of what the food is like. If
she is an experienced worker she does not expect much.

                  *       *       *       *       *

[Sidenote: Living-in a disadvantage to women with dependents]

All women cannot make use of the board and lodging offered in a hotel.
It depends upon the conditions of their personal life. Married women or
women with dependents are barred. So, in some hotels, where the same
wage is offered to workers living in or out, married women and women
with children are forced to accept the cash wage without the board and
lodging. Often this worked great hardship to the women whose husbands
were out of work. It was difficult, too, for the woman with dependents
for whom she had to maintain a home. A number of widows with children
were forced to accept the low cash wage. Finding that this wage would
not support them, many of them put their children in institutions and
lived in. They felt, on the whole, that this was a highly unsatisfactory
solution. With night work and a seven-day week, maids could rarely see
their children.

                  *       *       *       *       *

[Sidenote: Money value placed upon food and lodging by the hotels]

The cost of board and room to employees, furnished as it is upon a large
scale, is without doubt much less than the cost of the same if purchased
retail by the employee. In order to judge of the value of board and
lodging which is offered by the hotel, it is necessary to have some
standards by which to measure it. Hotels have made no attempt to put a
money value on lodging and board. The only way an estimate can be made
of the cost to hotels is by the difference in wages paid to employees
living in and those living out in the same establishment. Even this
means is scarcely accurate because, in some cases, the same wage is paid
to both and a varying number of meals is eaten by the employees.

A few instances can be given, however. In three hotels where one group
of employees have meals and lodging and where the group living out took
no meals in the hotel, there was a difference in the wage between the
two groups. The difference which may be said to be _the value placed by
the hotels on food and lodging_ was, in the three hotels, $2.30, $3.04
and $3.46, respectively.

In seven hotels where one group lived in and one group roomed out but
ate in, the wage difference illustrates _the value set by the hotel upon
lodging_. The difference in wages varied from $1 a week to $2.31 a week.


                  *       *       *       *       *

[Sidenote: Living on a hotel wage]

In the hotels of up-state cities Polish maids are beginning to replace
the American workers. One employment manager said, “We like these
foreigners. They don’t expect to spend so much money, and they’ll put up
with more.” Again and again the complaint was heard that the hotel wages
were insufficient to live on, even when food and lodging were included.
Many of the workers found it necessary to buy food in addition to that
provided by the hotel in order to keep their health. Those who did not
live in the hotels were unable, because of the irregular hour schedules,
to take advantage of the cheaper rates of boarding houses for meals. In
most cases they had no family connections on which they could depend.
They were forced, therefore, to buy their meals at restaurant prices or
else to cook them themselves. Workers, whose wage included three meals
but no lodging, were not always able to take advantage of the meals
offered. So it happened that waitresses and pantry maids, when their day
began in the afternoon, often had only one meal in the hotel. Again, if
they had family responsibilities, they could often not reach the hotel
in time for breakfast. If a maid’s day ended early she lost time by
staying for supper in the hotel. The result is that many workers eat the
noon meal only in the hotel and provide the other meals at their own
expense when they are rooming out.

Most of the hotel workers prefer to live out. “You like a room by
yourself which you know is clean. These hotel rooms have so many girls
in them, and they’re all kinds.” But those who do live out experience
the difficulty of paying rent out of their small wage. One girl, who
worked in a New York hotel for $35 a month and meals, had to pay $25 a
month for her room. “Of course,” she said, “I can’t live on that.”

A worker in a Rochester hotel, a widow with three children all living at
home, earned $10.50 a week with no board or lodging. She said her eldest
son was a printer who was out on strike. “He gets $19 a week strike
pay,” she said, “while I get $10.50 a week for working 7 days. Of course
my pay doesn’t make me independent. It just helps along. It doesn’t go
far when you have to buy your own shoes and shoes for a 12-year-old
boy.” One woman, who received $50 a month and lived out, worked all day
in the hotel and then packed candy every evening from 6 to 10 o’clock to
make enough money to live on. She had a family to support. Another
intelligent American woman, earning $10 a week, was keeping her sick
husband in one room for which she paid $8 a month. She had one bed and a
table. The rest of the furniture was packing boxes. She had to prepare
all the meals in her spare time.

Aside from food and rent, clothing is the largest item in the hotel
workers’ budget. Both a uniform for work and street clothes are needed.
The uniform was furnished by the hotel in only the largest New York City
hotels. When charged to the worker it cost about $4.00. She must also
furnish, if a chambermaid or waitress, a black waist and skirt for night
work. This waist usually costs from $2.00 to $2.50 and the skirt at
least $5.00. The waitress needs a number of clean white shirtwaists.
Shoes are an important item to both chambermaids and waitresses who are
on their feet all their working hours and must be neatly and comfortably
shod. Workers complained that they need shoes every three months and
that they cost at least $6 a pair.

After the necessary uniforms and a meagre supply of street clothing are
paid for, there is little left from the wage for incidentals and to meet
emergencies. Doctors and dentists are rarely consulted except in several
large hotels where doctors and dentists are employed by the hotel and
where workers can have attention at reduced rates. Women workers
neglected their teeth through poverty and ignorance. The older bathmaids
and maids frequently had only a few snags left. An oculist was an
unheard-of expense. Few of the older workers wore glasses even when they
had the greatest difficulty in seeing. Some used magnifying glasses to
read the newspapers, and others could not read print at all because of
the condition of their eyes. Magazines and newspapers were a luxury.
Workers never bought them and read only what was given them by guests.
Books were never seen. The workers seemed to have neither the energy nor
the money for any kind of self-improvement. The younger girls could
frequently find someone to take them out for amusement, but for the
older workers there was no recreation at all. They complained that they
could save nothing for their old age.

                  *       *       *       *       *

How many guests, who pay from $4.50 to $9 a day for their rooms, know
that _less than 6¢_ of this goes in cash to the chambermaid for her
services? In one hotel where these rates are paid, chambermaids receive
$300 a year or, allowing for two days off per month and a week’s
vacation, a little less than 90¢ for a working day. This is for cleaning
fifteen rooms. And yet we are told it is for service that we pay so
dearly in hotels!


------------------------------------------------------------------------




                          LIVING-IN CONDITIONS


The living-in conditions described in this report are the conditions
found by the workers who made the investigation. They lived in ten
hotels. These included some of the largest hotels in New York City where
a proportion of the women workers always live in.

                  *       *       *       *       *

[Sidenote: Food]

The food for maids and other women workers is served in “Helps’ Hall.”
When the worker offers to take the new maid “down” to lunch she means it
literally. Usually it is in the second basement underground. Through
labyrinths, ill-lighted and heated, sometimes dripping from pipes
overhead, she finally arrives at “Helps’ Hall.” Sometimes she finds it
next to a basement laundry which is always steaming hot. As the worker
enters, she faces a long row of steam tables. She has her meal ticket
punched, grabs a tray, and gets in line. There is no choice of food. Her
tray is filled with soup, meat, potatoes and pudding and she deposits it
on one of the deal tables in the room and seats herself with the rest on
a bench without a back. If she comes late, there is often a litter of
spilled food and dirty dishes on the table which take away her appetite.
There is a rattle of tin knives and forks. Usually only maids and other
women workers are eating in the dining hall, although in small hotels
men and women eat at different tables in the same room.

In the hotels in which the workers lived in, they found the dining-room
service always hurried. Soup was usually spilled and too much sugar put
in the coffee. In one smaller hotel in New York City where men and women
ate together workers waited on themselves. All cut their bread from the
same loaf, dished out meat at the steam tables, often with the help of
their fingers, and poured their own milk. A late worker coming to lunch
found messed-over remains of food which had been fingered by many
unwashed hands of porters, laundrymen, maids and cleaners.

The quantity of food served was sufficient. Plates were well filled,
second helpings were often allowed, tea, coffee, milk, bread and butter
were always plentiful. Desserts usually “ran out,” but desserts were
considered a luxury anyway. The quality of food was inferior. Poor cuts
of meat and leftovers in the form of stew and hash with cold bologna for
supper was the usual meat diet. Tinned vegetables, carrots, beans and
macaroni without cheese were customary. Boiled potatoes were the
mainstay. Rice, in different forms, was always served. Rice and bread
puddings were the favorite desserts. Butter was often oleomargarine and
milk was thin and blue. Fresh vegetables, fresh salads and fruit never
appeared even in midsummer. It is true salads and melons were sometimes
served, but they were wilted, and workers would not touch them. Ice
cream, a very skimmed-milk ice cream, was served once a week on Sundays.
Stale French pastries and sour chocolate eclairs sometimes appeared.

The following menus for “Helps’ Hall” in a New York hotel illustrate the
unvaried, unappetizing and unhealthful food offered. The meals were
served on the hottest days of the month of August. Breakfast: Oatmeal,
unsalted and with lumps in it, sugar, tea and milk. Lunch: Macaroni
without cheese flavored with meat grease, boiled potatoes, bread and
corn bread, butter, coffee or tea and unflavored rice pudding. Supper:
Fish (which was very strong and unedible), boiled potatoes, bread,
butter and tea. Following this supper for lunch the next day there was
rice cooked in meat grease with boiled potatoes and stew added. For
supper there was stew again, corn bread, coffee, tea and bread pudding
flavored with cinnamon.

And so on, every day appeared stew and boiled potatoes during a week of
work in this hotel. The workers all complained of the food as not fit to
eat. They said, “They don’t care what they give you in a hotel. Don’t
eat most of it, it will kill you. They feed you like dogs here.” Many
workers did not come to lunch at all. They made a little tea and a
sandwich in their rooms. Many others on hot days, after eating such
meals, had indigestion and were forced to leave their work. They went
out for meals as often as they could, especially for supper. One girl
said, “I am so sick of potatoes. I do want some fresh vegetables and a
salad. Of course you can get a real meal sometimes outside, but, Holy
God, on our wages!” Another worker was overheard giving advice to a girl
who was leaving, “Well, kid, I tell you, it’s God’s truth this ain’t no
place for a young American girl like you. When you’re young, you can get
out. You get into a club, kid, where you get the same grub they eat
theirselves. Here, the grub will make you old before your time. Look at
me, I’m just thirty and I look fifty. If you stay here, you just get
used to the food and everything. You see, they’re all old ones here. You
get out. Now I just eat a little toast and tea some days. What else do
they give you? Potatoes! I tell you to get out, though I hate like hell
to see you go.”

The food served to pantry workers was much better and they could eat
salads and fruit if they cared to. They ate on the job, however, and
often had no time to eat their lunches. Waitresses in some hotels ate
the same grade of food as maids and kitchen help, but they “picked up”
extra food on the side.

                  *       *       *       *       *

[Sidenote: Lodging]

The lodging furnished women in large hotels was confined to bed space in
a dormitory except in a few instances. The bedrooms varied in size, but
were everywhere overcrowded. There were from two to ten girls in a room
in most hotels. Cots were placed side by side and the only ventilation
came from windows at the far end of the room. The rooms were often
overheated and ill-ventilated. Several rooms opened on air shafts. In
one hotel there were three occupants in a room with one window opening
on a narrow airshaft. The air was “vicious” and it was so dark that an
electric light was needed to see at noon.

In one hotel a worker, when shown to her room, was told, “This is an
awful nice room, not many people in it.” It was a room 10 × 20 feet,
with six beds, two dressers, no chairs and a row of lockers. There were
two small windows at one end of the room. “There are twice as many girls
in the room next door,” said the guide. A room in a large metropolitan
hotel, 18 feet long, 15 feet wide and 10 feet high, housed eight girls.
They slept in double-decker beds. There were two large windows and when
the weather was hot enough so everyone was willing to have the windows
open, the air was reasonably good. But when it was cold and some one of
the eight girls wanted the windows closed, the air in the morning was
frightful. Three dressers stood in a curtained space on one side of the
room under which the clothes of the eight girls hung together. There was
one straight chair apiece. The room was steam-heated, with an electric
light hanging from the ceiling. When the girls who slept in the lower
berths wanted to read they had to stick their heads out, as the upper
berths took away the light. As the girls living in the room worked
different shifts, there was always some one asleep, which meant that the
rest must keep quiet. A girl coming in at midnight after a night watch
had to undress in the dark. One of the maids said, “This room is one of
the pleasantest in the house.”

In the smaller hotels dormitory rooms were less frequent. In one hotel
two girls slept in double decker beds in an 8 × 10 room. In one hotel
only were single rooms found, but this hotel had just begun to room its
maids and had not yet filled the rooms with two beds apiece.

Beds had adequate linen which was usually clean, though often ragged.
Towels and soap were furnished by the hotel in every case. In the larger
hotels a maid cared for the rooms and made the beds. In the smaller
hotels this was done by the workers, and bedrooms were very carelessly
kept. There was an adequate number of baths and toilets in the largest,
modern hotels of New York City, although they were often ill-kept and
dirty. In the small hotels in New York City and in the hotels of the
other cities of the State an inadequate number of baths and toilets were
found and the plumbing was poor. Baths were ill-kept and often the hot
and cold water faucets were out of order. In some hotels maids were
expected to use guests’ toilets and showers at odd hours.

Laundry facilities were inadequate except in the largest New York
hotels. Maids washed their clothes at night and hung them in their rooms
to dry. The damp and unhealthful atmosphere in a bedroom in which wet
clothes are hanging can be imagined. In some cases an iron could be
secured from the linen room. In others, maids bought their own irons
which they attached to electric lights in their rooms. In several hotels
maids were required to wash their own uniforms under these conditions
and often they washed clothes for the guests.

In no hotel in which the investigators worked was there a room in which
women workers could receive guests. For social life they were forced
outside the hotel to the streets. In only one hotel was there a
telephone in the employees’ quarters. Three hotels had rest rooms for
women workers with comfortable chairs and tables. Two had victrolas and
one had a piano in its rest room. No books or magazines were ever found.
In the majority of hotels there was not a comfortable chair which women
workers living-in could use while off duty. They spent their recreation
hours talking on trunks in the halls or lying on the beds in their
rooms.


------------------------------------------------------------------------




                            RECOMMENDATIONS


On the basis of the facts set forth in this report, the Consumers’
League of New York believes that there is need for _a special code for
the hotel industry_. The nature of the work in hotels is such that
regulations regarding the length of hours and the distribution of hours
in shifts cannot be made to apply to all occupations alike. Separate
arrangements, therefore, must be made for chambermaids, pantry workers,
waitresses, etc. The Consumers’ League recommends that a more intensive
and extensive investigation be made by the State Industrial Commission
to secure additional information necessary for drafting such a special
code.


                 A Special Code for the Hotel Industry

The recommendations of the Consumers’ League as to points which should
be considered in drafting a code for the hotel industry follow.

It is recommended that legislation be passed to make it possible to
include in the Industrial Code the regulation of hours of work as well
as the actual working conditions and conditions under which women hotel
workers live in a hotel.


                                 Hours

Women workers should have 24 hours of consecutive rest in every calendar
week.

No woman worker should work more than 8 hours in one day or more than 48
hours in one week.

No woman worker should be allowed to work between the hours of 12
midnight and 6 A.M.

Because it is a continuous industry, workers may be permitted to work
broken shifts. Not more than two shifts should be worked in one day. For
chambermaids and pantry maids there should be at least four hours
between shifts in order that the time may be utilized by the worker. For
waitresses there should be two shifts with at least four hours between
shifts, or three shifts within a spread of thirteen hours.

Each worker should have a scheduled time for meals. At least one-half
hour should be allowed for each meal.


                          Living-in Conditions

The system of living-in should be abolished.

While the living-in system continues, each worker should have a single
room or, if two employees are in one room, there should be single beds,
not double deckers. Ventilation should be by window. In the case of
airshaft, court or area-way there should be a specified number of feet
between the window and the opposite wall. The rooms of workers should be
located so that they do not get their air from the laundry or kitchen.
Each room should be equipped with a sanitary metal bed, clean and
sufficient bedding, a locker, closet or dresser where clothes may be
kept sanitary and safe, and at least one comfortable chair.

Sanitary conveniences (toilets, showers and tubs) should be separately
enclosed. Those for men and women should be remote from each other and
plainly marked. Sanitary conveniences should be clean and light, and
there should be a sufficient number to each floor for the number of
employees using them.

There should be hospital accommodations provided in accordance with the
size of the establishment. The room should have beds so that workers who
are ill can be segregated from the other employees.

A sitting room should be provided, quiet, with comfortable chairs, where
visitors are permitted.

The food served to workers should constitute a well-balanced diet,
wholesome, varied, appetizing and sufficient in quantity. It should be
served in a well-lighted and aired, quiet and clean dining room.


                           A Minimum Wage Law

The Consumers’ League recommends that a minimum wage law be passed in
New York State which shall include the hotels in its application.


                                Tipping

Tipping should be abolished.


------------------------------------------------------------------------




                     SUGGESTIONS TO HOTEL MANAGERS


It is suggested that it be the duty of special employees to care for the
workers’ rooms and also to serve the meals, remove the dishes and keep
the tables clean in the employees’ dining room or cafeteria.

It is suggested that employees be interviewed and hired by a person
understanding the technique of the selection of workers and the
requirements of the various jobs in the hotel, with the purpose of
securing an efficient force of workers and reducing the turnover of
labor. An experienced person, preferably a woman, should be responsible
for the introduction of the new employee to her job, her training, her
transfer or promotion.

The conditions of living-in, while the system is continued, should be
under the supervision of a competent woman.


------------------------------------------------------------------------




 ● Transcriber’s Notes:
    ○ Missing or obscured punctuation was silently corrected.
    ○ Typographical errors were silently corrected.
    ○ Inconsistent spelling and hyphenation were made consistent only
      when a predominant form was found in this book.
    ○ Text that was in italics is enclosed by underscores (_italics_).



*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK BEHIND THE SCENES IN A HOTEL ***

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the
United States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away--you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you will have to check the laws of the country where
  you are located before using this eBook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that:

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation's website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without
widespread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
